We can see and hear you.
Welcome, Susan
and Nikki. Do we also have Christine?
Christine should be joining shortly.
Excellent. Well, welcome to the Health Select Committee.
We have received written
information that you have provided to the committee.
We do have you here for 10 minutes that maybe you can talk the committee
through the information that you've given or if there's any other information you'd
like to add. So I'll hand that time over to you now.
Welcome, Christine.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak about Health New Zealand's approach to
reducing meningitis risk and the impact, particularly meningococcal
disease meningitis.
I have here with me today,
Nikki Canterbury, National
Director, Immunization of the National Public Health
Service. I myself am Dr. Christine McIntosh.
I'm the Clinical Director of
Prevention, Immunization in the National Public Health Service, and I have Dr.
Susan Jack with me today,
National Clinical Director in Protection in the National Public Health Service.
Health New Zealand acknowledges the important work of the Meningitis Foundation and
their aim to prevent meningitis and its impacts, and
we recognize the foundation has recently presented to the committee.
Health New Zealand's strategy is an integrated public health approach, combining
immunization, multiple access points, and targeted promotion,
surveillance, and rapid response.
I'm going to hand over to Dr. Susan Jack to describe the surveillance and rapid
response part of meningococcal disease, and then I'll discuss prevention through
immunization. Over to you, Susan.
Thanks, Christine. So I know Meningitis Foundation
have done a really great job at presenting about meningococcal disease, which,
as you know, can present very suddenly and get worse
very quickly.
Survivors, in addition, may experience major complications,
including brain injury, hearing loss, or limb
amputations, and it altogether has very significant
impacts for individuals and families.
Meningococcal disease is caused by Neisseria meningitidis.
It's a bacteria, and in New Zealand, the key serogroups
are groups B and W. And the data that we
have shared in our submission shows a clear
dominance of group B in both cases and deaths.
The risk for meningococcal invasive disease is not evenly
distributed, so we have the highest incidence occurring in infants and
children under five, and then again, another increase
in adolescents and young adults, especially those aged 15
to 19, where it's linked to close
and prolonged contact. And as part of this
close living settings are a key risk
context. So we're talking about boarding schools, university halls of
residence, military barracks, prisons, and other
institutional or group living environments.
The greatest burden of disease falls on Māori, particularly
infants under one, and also on Pacific peoples, and
both these groups experience higher incidence of invasive
meningococcal disease. In 2025, you'll see
from our notes that over half of the cases occurred amongst
Māori and Pacific peoples, and so therefore, these are the groups
with greatest need.
So, as I said, meningococcal group B has been the dominant
cause in recent years, and it also causes
seasonal peaks in winter months, and this informs our planning and
prevention efforts.
So alongside vaccination, strong surveillance and
response systems are essential. Invasive
meningococcal disease is legally notifiable, so this means
clinicians must notify urgently when a case is suspected.
So this is without waiting even for lab confirmation.
They must inform us. Once notified,
so notified to medical officers of health in our public health services,
the public health services undertake urgent contact tracing
and then provide clearance antibiotics to those who are deemed
close contacts, and this is to reduce the risk of further
transmission.
Our health practitioners are supported by national guidance to
standardize notification and management across the country.
And this is one of those diseases where clinicians are very aware, and they
do notify us urgently, and it's a rapid response
that comes from the public health services.
At a national level, PHS Science, formerly ESR, monitors
trends and also looks to identify
potential geographic clusters. And if one of these clusters
emerge, then they alert the local public health services,
and we do follow up to see if there is a cluster or an outbreak happening.
I'm just going to hand back now to Christine to talk about the vaccinations.
Thanks, Susan.
As the committee are aware, Pharmac is the agency responsible for determining which
vaccines will be funded and the criteria for accessing these.
As you know, Health New Zealand is responsible for implementing the immunization
schedule, and we work very hard to maximize the uptake
amongst eligible groups in ensuring really timely,
easy access to vaccination. The key priority is
achieving high immunization coverage, particularly among the populations
with the greatest health need.
There are three vaccine types on the National Immunization Schedule,
which protect against the causes of meningitis, including
pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae, but today we'll focus on the
meningococcal vaccines because we believe that's the focus of the Meningitis
Foundation and this situation.There are two
meningococcal vaccines, one called MenB, and the brand
name for that at the moment is Bexsero, and
MenACWY. Menquadfi is the
brand name for that at the moment. And these are funded for
very specific groups. MenB has been funded since
2023. It's funded for all children under the age of five,
and it's scheduled at 3 months, 5 months, and 12 months of age.
And there is funded catch-up for children under the age of five.
It's also funded for two doses for 13 to
25-year-olds who are entering or living in close contact
settings that Susan has already described.
The other vaccine, MenACWY, has been funded for one dose
since 2019. It's funded for the same adolescent and young adult
group as the MenB immunization
and the 13 to 25-year-old age group, and in
the same eligible close-living situations.
Both MenB and MenACWY are also funded for people
at increased clinical risk because of underlying health conditions
or when they are a close contact of a confirmed case.
With regards to access and uptake of the vaccination,
general practice remains the primary delivery channel for
vaccinations for meningococcal vaccines, with outreach
immunization services, including the Hauora Māori partners and Pacific
providers, supporting reach into communities with high need.
Delivery settings have expanded to reduce barriers,
and this has occurred particularly in the last three to four years with
Well Child Tamariki Ora services including Whānau Ātina Plunket,
midwives, particularly for the younger age groups and in
our older age group eligibility, youth health services and tertiary
education health providers increasing access.
In addition, since 2024, community pharmacies
have also been able to order and administer meningococcal vaccines, and
we now have 475 pharmacies across the country currently able
to offer funded meningococcal vaccination.
Consumer access to immunization
is supported through Book my Vaccine, through the Vaccination Helpline, and
access to immunization records through My Health Records.
So people have much better visibility of their own immunization
records now.
The coverage is improving, as you can see from the submission, but gaps
do remain in populations experiencing the higher burden of disease.
In particular, we draw your attention, as Susan has, to the
MenB vaccination with full
immunization at one year of age, 72% for all
ethnicities, but 58% for Māori and 69% for
Pacific people. It's really important to stress that the timeliness of those
vaccines in the first year of life are really, really important because that is-
Christine, sorry, I don't want to interrupt.
We are running out of time, and we have got-
Sure
we have got indication of some questions from the committee.
So is there any other key points left that you would like to
raise?
Yes, I'd just like to raise that we have increased
our promotion efforts since 2023, working quite extensively with
schools and boarding facilities and tertiary education, and also that
we are partnered with the Meningitis Foundation, particularly during Meningitis
Campaign Week, to really support increasing
awareness of the meningitis vaccines.
So thank you to the committee for hearing
from us this morning and for taking our submission.
Excellent.
Happy to have any questions.
Right.
With the committee's forbearance, I'd just like to draw out some points, maybe over
a few questions.
Is it correct that the duration of action of these
vaccines is approximately five years?
Do you want me to take that, Christine? Yeah. So, Dr.
Farrell, that is correct for the MenACWY, and
for the MenB, it's actually shorter than that, two or three
years best coverage. So
yeah, the timing of the vaccinations are timed for the
greatest need, greatest risk
time.
We have heard about
tragic
impacts of meningococcal disease on the committee.
Can you design a schedule that is practical
that could prevent all cases of meningococcal disease?
If not, why not?
So as you know, it's actually a rare disease, so
you do need to have
really great coverage if you're going to protect every single case.
So by the vaccination schedule for protecting our
young children, our under fives,
that is the routine schedule, so that is one that we're
absolutely putting a lot of focus on.
For the adolescents, it is trickier because at the moment,
it is funded for those going into
residential boarding facilities or halls of
residence.
And so a lot of effort has gone into promotion of that, but
we realize that's less than full coverage at this point,
and we'll continue working on that.
Mm.
Excellent. Thank you. We have reached time, so thank you very much for
both your written and oral submission.
We really appreciate the evidence and expertise you've brought to the matter.
Thank you.
We now will move to the Immunization Advisory Centre, and I
do believe they're with us in person.
Excellent.
Okay.
I think Nicole's gone to the washroom.
She'll be back in-
Right. That makes sense
... but she's here.
But if you want to do that, I've got you. So, okay.
I'll do it with that.
To
cause meningitis or septicaemia. That is extremely rare.
Carriage is common. The people who are most affected in our country are
young infants. The second highest risk group is teenagers and young
adults, but it goes across the whole population.
There are particular groups who are at higher risk.
Those where it seems to get easier from the back of the
throat into the body,
close contact, crowded households.
As you would expect, it's higher in crowded households, Māori and Pasifika
people have higher rates. There are two vaccines available.
Both are very effective in New Zealand.
One is for B, and one is for four other serotypes called
ACWY.
Currently, in New Zealand, serotypes, 75% are B,
and about a quarter are within the other vaccine.
Serotypes change over time. New Zealand's had a higher
rate of meningococcal disease prior to COVID.
Because of the reduction in respiratory illnesses at COVID time,
when we shut our borders, we also had a secondary reduction in bacterial
infections. So the COVID epidemiology now is
expected to change in the next few years. So we need to be ready for that.
So even though we're 75% B, the other strains are important.
That's a very quick overview.
So current New Zealand situation is that we offer the B
vaccine to our infant program. We offer
the B and the quadrivalent to our teenagers,
our young adults in high-risk situations, in crowded situations,
going to universities, boarding schools,
military, prisons, youth offending, where they're in crowded
situations. We don't know how well that strategy is working.
Usually, targeted strategies aren't highly effective.
Could we do better? I'm not going to carefully go through all our
recommendations due to time. I'm going to really hit the nail.
So firstly, we could do better with our infant program.
I'm sure everybody in this room knows that we could do better.
One thing we are not doing currently with Becsero is delivering it at six
weeks of age. We're delivering it after the first dose.
So that would be a reasonably easy win to reduce the delivery of the
first stage to tie it in with the first immunization event, then to
ensure all infants are enrolled effectively with primary care and found.
So that's part of the strategy for improving the infant program.
Can we improve the high-risk program?
That's to high-risk medical conditions, and that's to teenagers and young
adults in crowded conditions. We can.
We have a range of recommendations within our written submission.
We can do better. Could we deliver a universal
program? It is possible.
Other equivalent countries are currently delivering, particularly the
quadrivalent. Many countries are doing that to infants.
I would suggest as the epidemiology changes, we'll need to be delivering a
quadrivalent infant program because they're the highest risk.
Teenagers and young adults, yes, you could do a universal program.
It's complex. These vaccines need boosting.
They only last three to five years, so we don't want to give it too early.
So our
current program is intermediate schools is too early.
We would need a high school-based program to be able to deliver
effectively, or you'd need to boost, all of which would cost a lot of
resources,
but it's possible. Australia currently is the only comparable country.
South Australia delivers a B program in adolescence.
We're still waiting for the evaluation of how effective that is.
So it is possible, a universal program,
but it's tricky. So what I wanted to finish with is actually New
Zealand has a couple of really high needs other vaccines.
I'm going to use this opportunity to push for infant RSV, that
many of you know that. It causes up to 50%, if not more,
of our infant winter respiratory admissions.
We're just about to hit into there. I'm a frontline healthcare professional.
We will get slammed this winter, every winter, by RSV.
There is effective, established vaccines or
immunotherapeutics to reduce the burden of RSV in infancy
that most other comparable countries plus have introduced.
We need that now. My second plea, because I'm taking the moment, the
shingles vaccine in the slightly more mature ages.
Yeah.
We only get the shingles vaccine to 65 years of age,
full stop, just in that one year.
Mm-hmm.
What we know is a considerable burden of shingles in adults from
65 years and up. We have an aging population like myself.
Mm-hmm.
We have lots and lots of what we would call immunosenescence.
We have lots of people with significant medical problems.
Shingles is a huge burden, and New Zealand is falling
behind similar countries for these important
vaccines that we are currently not getting, even though I celebrate the
changes to the flu program this year. So if you could allow that for her.
Sum it up?
Do we have any questions from the committee?
Yes. Please
Thanks for your comments about
the possibility of a universal vaccine for
adolescents, which is currently targeted.
That is in line with the submission that we received, your
written from the Meningitis Foundation.
And that written submission
says that improving coverage for the currently
eligible groups should be the priority.
Yes.
Help me explain why you've said that priority,
and we're both aware that Pharmac makes these
cost-benefit decisions.
Yes.
Trying to bring new people into eligibility when you've already
picked the lowest-hanging fruit in terms of the
highest-risk groups, does that mean that you're
dealing with more and more people to
vaccinate for fewer and fewer cases prevented as you
move outside the highest-risk groups?
Universal programs are always the most effective.
School-based universal program would be ideal.
So a school-based adolescent, high school-based 15 or
16-year-olds universal program would be the best to reduce the
burden of meningococcal in adolescents and young adults.
It's
a horrible disease, but it's relatively rare.
Mm-hmm.
So I think you'll find the cost benefit doesn't stack up.
That is the best answer. As a medic, I'd say, "Yes, please, I would like a
universal adolescent high school-based program."
Okay. And the reason why you took the opportunity to mention those two other
vaccines is,
you have a sense that those will be better cost benefit than
wider eligibility to meningococcal?
That is correct. I believe they will be better cost benefit for the benefit of our
community. Now, I do recognize that this is a horrendous disease with
terrible outcomes, but it is rare.
So we could improve the current highly targeted program.
Now, I do have to say that highly targeted programs are always hard to
improve, particularly in this age group. Let's be realistic.
We've all had adolescents and young adults, and some of this is lifestyle, so it's
a tricky one.
Yeah. One more question from Rachel.
Go for it.
Thank you.
All right. wrap. Awesome. Thank you.
We heard a very distressing-
Yes
... experience of a woman in her 30s with
severe meningococcal-
Yeah
... disease and permanent complications as a-
... result. Because the
duration of action of these vaccines are five years, can you ever
imagine a time that we're able to prevent across the lifespan
of a meningococcal disease?
That's what we hoped for. We hoped we would get herd immunity like we have with
other vaccines. Now, at this stage, there is no clear evidence for
B of herd immunity, so that's why we haven't got a magic
vaccine for that woman. There is herd immunity with the C,
but the most common type at the moment in the vaccine we have, B,
does not appear to have herd immunity, and that's the recent South Australian
evidence. So that's why it's hard.
The other thing we should be looking at much harder is why that woman, why
particular people, does it cross into the brain?
Now, the other thing I would say is respiratory viruses usually come before
meningococcal. So focusing on respiratory virus
reduction will help reduce meningococcal because we
cannot, with the universal vaccination program, prevent all meningococcal.
Excellent. Thank you very much. And that's unfortunately probably where we have to
end. I thought that was a very clear presentation, so thank you.
Very clear.
Thank you very much.
Happy to have any more questions that we can help you with, Kevin.
Thanks for your time.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you very much. We now have reached 8:55,
so we will-